---
title: 'Calculating COSMO-RS solvation free energies using COSMOtherm'
date: 2020-07-26
permalink: /posts/2020/07/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - COSMO-RS
  - Solvation free energy
---

This post will talk about how to calculate COSMO-RS solvation free energies using COSMOtherm program. 

For theoretical details of COSMO-RS, people can read related papers and discussions. For example, this [review](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/wcms.1338) by Dr. Klamt and a very interesting [discussion](http://www.ccl.net/chemistry/resources/messages/2006/02/21.005-dir/index.html) on CCL.

For practical use, the first step is to generate the cosmo files and energy files of both solute and solvent. Here is an example of Gaussian input file to generate the cosmo files. 

```
%mem=4GB
%NprocShared=4
%chk=c001.chk
#p BVP86/TZVP/DGA1 OPT freq SCRF=(CPCM,READ) NoSymm

title

-1 1
 C     0.249753     1.980987     0.000000
 H     0.456885     3.027456     0.000000
 C     0.000000     0.778351     0.000000
 H    -0.275950    -1.027304     0.000000
 O    -0.290508    -2.038752     0.000000
 H     0.644609    -2.246171     0.000000

RADII=KLAMT

--Link1--
%mem=4GB
%NprocShared=4
%chk=c001.chk
# BVP86/TZVP/DGA1 SCRF=COSMORS geom=check guess=read Nosymm

title

-1 1

c001.cosmo
```
The cosmo file will be generated in the directory where you submit Gaussian jobs. Besides, you also need energy files of both solute and solvent, especially for ions, for this you just run the jobs before --Link1-- (i.e., only opt freq) and remove SCRF part and "radii=klamt". Then you can grep the single point energy of gas-phase solute and solvent and print the energy in energy files. Then place all cosmo files and energy files (so at least four files for a solute-solvent combination) in the same directory, and you can calculate COSMO-RS solvation free energy using COSMOtherm now. 

For people in Coote group, to load COSMOtherm on gadi, we can move to /scratch/x69/COSMOlogic/COSMOthermX19/COSMOthermX and ./COSMOthermX19. When COSMO-therm pops up, click "from file" to choose the cosmo files you need. The corresponding energy files will be used by the program automatically. Choose "TZVP" paramaterization set, then choose "∆G solvation" and then choosing the temperature, finally click "add" and "run" then you will get the COSMO-RS solvation free energies. 

We can also use COSMOthermX with command line instead of GUI when we have multiple jobs. Details of this and others can be found in the COSMO-therm manual. 


